All right.
Welcome to the nitty gritty.
We'll talk about connections, sockets and queues.
And I'll split this into two lectures.
The first part we'll talk about the.
In both cases we'll talk about the core kernel network data structures.
But in this particular thing I'm going to talk about the sockets and connections.
And then in the next one we'll talk about specifically how to read from connections and what kernel
data structures does the kernel use to actually implement that.
Let's jump into it.
This is going to be a beautiful ride.
Let's just swim you guys here.
Let's swim and don't memorize anything.
Just swim.
So.
First concept concept of a socket and a socket.
Really.
When it comes to actual data, structure is nothing but a struct.
A struct really in C?
But it's also a file descriptor, at least in Linux.
No.
In windows, it becomes an object.
Because in Linux everything is a is a file.
But what happens here is.
When I listen and we talked about what is the concept of listening, right.
And the fundamentals like, hey, I want to accept connections on a specific IP address and a specific
port.
Hussein, use the word specific.
Can I have more than an IP address in one machine?
Of course.
In every computer.
You have multiple NICs or network interface cards.
And not only that, you can technically create unlimited Virtual Network interface card, each with
its own IP address.
Because that's all you know.
You can do anything you want, but ideally you have a physical network and you have a mapped mount which
have essentially that network, uh, virtual IP, not virtual IP.
Sorry.
Uh, it will have a neck exposed to you that you say, hey, this is my IP address.
This is my subnet mask.
This is my, uh, default gateway.
This is my DNS resolver, IP address, all of that.
It's my proxy.
Stuff like that.
Yeah.
So you can listen on an IP and a port.
It has to be those two things, right?
So that means I have four network cards.
I'm listening on the IP address of this network card.
You have to specify it, you know, and then you specify the port.
And if you're if you've ever built a back end, you'll always see that the default is, I don't know,
888 8 or 880.
The port and the and the IP is the loopback default Nic, which points to myself for development purposes.
Right.
So that's the tcp IP 127.0.0.1.
That's the IP version four for IPv6 loopback it's bracket colon colon one.
That's the loopback for IPv6.
But that's basically the games we're playing here.
You might say, I don't have to do anything.
When I listen, I just call in Node.js.
I could call, listen, and then I close the bracket.
I don't know any of this stuff.
Well, this is where we need to talk, you guys, when you listen, you can give the option to listen
on all interfaces, which is absolutely horrible idea.
Horrible.
And I'm really mad that this is a default.
Apparently we have to make it a default because it's too much.
To look up an IP.
An IP can changes and and to make it easy, let's listen on all interfaces.
And you do that by doing 0.0.0.04 zeros or I think an IPv6.
Bracket.
Colon colon bracket that listens on I Ole IPv6 versus all IPv4 interfaces because you can have both
right?
Watch out for this because you're building a small app that does, I don't know opens a port and you're
accidentally deployed it in production and you want it like literally to run it locally.
You just and all of a sudden you you run it and it will just listen on all production and next, which
happens to one of them happens to be a public IP address or a public or an IP address that is essentially
mapped to some load balancer.
It's public eventually.
Right.
So now you exposed your app to the public.
That's how every single MongoDB instance and Elasticsearch data got breached, because people just listen
to all interfaces and deploy it on the cloud.
And and literally attackers will scan the whole web, scan all the IPv4, uh, you know, ranges looking
for the Elasticsearch Mongo DB port and then connect and then brute force their way.
So that's really dangerous.
You really want to listen on a specific port that you're actually know, right.
It's hard.
It's difficult.
It's Klum not Klum.
It's it's a it it's it requires some more work, but it's secure.
Now then we have listened on a port and IP Hussain, when you do that you call a system called code.
Listen and you get back a beautiful file descriptor called socket.
And this is I'm going to coin a name for it, call it listening socket file descriptor.
Because a connection is also a socket.
But that's kind of a different kind of a socket.
It's the same data structure.
Right.
And the kernel kind of stores them in the same file, the same table data structure.
But you can see that the socket has only listening socket.
It doesn't have like a source IP or destination IP.
It doesn't have any of that.
But a connection actually is is a is an.
Is an entity that has two sides.
It has source, a client and a server.
So a connection is different than a socket, but I'm going to call it a connection socket for now.
We have a socket.
Beautiful.
What do we get.
We get a file descriptor.
Where does it live.
It lives in the process ID where PCB.
We know all these terms now guys we can talk safely with them.
So socket is a file.
What happens if I fork.
Guess what.
If you fork uh the the the files are shared.
Right.
Because you get a copy of everything that the process had at that point, including file descriptors.
So watch out.
Maybe this is, this is by design and this is good.
So for careful what you forked.
You fork, you get everything.
You get a copy, complete copy.
Now copy on write can kick in, of course, and only gets you unique stuff.
But essentially you have a completely new version of that.
So if I listened on a process, I have process a I listened.
I got a file descriptor that is the socket, the listening socket.
It's absolutely useless.
Just that second listening socket by itself.
We need to do something to it to get actual connections.
But then what happened?
You fork.
You get a brand new process, so you get a brand new file descriptor that technically point to the same
socket.
So you have one file descriptor, one file descriptor.
They are two different file descriptors, but they point to the same essentially same socket.
So you can accept connections here and accept connections here.
And that's how essentially uh how socket.
How you can scale acceptance of a process, which is our next topic.
So we talked about let's let's go back to our single process.
We have a single socket in my process for every listening socket that we create you guys we get uh something
called two things.
You get two queues.
Uh, don't get hung up on the word queue because they are not actually implemented as a queue, because
a queue is a very it's not very efficient in this particular case, actually, one of my students called
that out.
So I was saying like the queue seems to be very inefficient, but I and I looked at the source code.
It's not a queue at all.
So it has a hash table it turns out.
But we talk about it as a queue because it's easier to talk through it this way.
So we get something called a syn.
Q and this belongs to the socket S and we get another Q called the accept q.
Why?
What are those for?
Well, if you if you're here, you probably know how to establish a TCP connection, right.
We do a send and then the server sends back a syn ack.
And then the client sends back an Ack.
And that's called the three way handshake.
And using that we get a beautiful, uh, connection.
Okay.
But that's the handshake.
To handle the handshake, we we need this sense, which is the synchronization.
We use them to, to synchronize the sequence numbers that we use to label every segment essentially.
So that's the first thing syn queue.
So if you have a lot of listening you get a lot of syn queues.
Essentially you also get an accept queue.
This stores completed connections because if I did if I am a client I want to connect to you.
I first send you a Syn by just sending you a syn.
I don't have a connection yet.
We take your sin and put it in the sink.
We don't have a full fledged connection.
We only have full fledged connection if we successfully completed the three way handshake, right?
So then you can see that, as I'm putting sense here from multiple clients, right from one client in
India, one client in Germany, one client coming from an IP address from Lebanon, one from Bahrain,
one you see, you can see that this can fill up.
And then we complete the connection.
So we move this stuff to the accept queue.
And we have fully fledged connection from Germany from Russia.
We have these connections ready.
But how many can I keep.
In my ex.
Before it fills up.
There is a size to those, and this size is called the backlog.
And you can essentially when you call listen you can specify the backlog.
And this is actually exposed.
All the way to the client.
Even in NodeJS you can note and you can specify how much is your backlog.
Really pretty cool if you think about it.
You might need a large backlog if you have so many connections coming your way and you want to.
Essentially you're not accepting connections fast enough.
We'll talk about accepting in a minute now, because connections that lives here still is not with us.
The back end.
This is still all kernel.
Rhyme.
So now let's talk about actually creating connection.
We don't we up to here we don't have a connection yet.
We only have a listening socket.
That is one file descriptor.
Now let's talk about connections.
What happened here is like completed connections are placed in the accept queue.
We talked about that after you finish when you put a send put it here.
And then the send entry comes here until we we send back the syn ack.
And then the client will send back an ack.
And then we match the ack with the syn here.
And then we remove it from the syn q and we add it to the accept queue.
And now we have a full fledged connection, but it still is not ready.
You have to accept it.
Who?
Who is you?
It's the back end application.
You might say I say I never call this function in my life.
Well, you don't, but Node.js does.
But does.
Django does all your framework does do.
Behind the scenes, you must call accept which which creates the file descriptor for that connection.
Yes, there is a dedicated Files connect descriptor file identifier for each connection.
And when you do that, then we create additional two queues for the actual data that are going to be
sent.
Right.
So when you do that you accept you're going to create a connection.
That connection is going to be a file descriptor which lives on whomever or whoever, whom or who,
whomever.
The process that called accept.
If I am process a, I called accept, then the file descriptor that comes back will live in process
A.
If I'm process B and happen to have access to the socket somehow and I called accept, then the file
descriptor that gets created will live in my Process B's PCB process control block, and it's going
to be a chain of file descriptors.
Maybe I'll accept 100 connections.
And with every one you get two cues send the cue or receive the cue will go will come to that in the
next lecture, but each of them, the send cue will go for your outgoing data.
So as a server, as a back end, if I send a response to my Rest API call that goes to the send queue.
If my client sends a request, it goes to the receive queue.
Does that make sense?
And vice versa.
The client also has a connection on its end as a client, and it will have a send queue and it has a
receiver queue.
The client does not have a socket.
It does not have a listening socket.
It has a just a connection.
Right.
So it has a send queue and receive queue.
So if a client sends a request it goes to the send queue.
And then eventually the kernel pushes it out to the neck.
And then uh, it holds the receive queue where the response from the server will go into before we actually
take the data and push it into the user space and do some stuff with it.
Let's go through the simple connection.
Establishment.
Three way handshake.
Beautiful.
We need it.
We need the handshake.
Otherwise, we cannot exchange information we need.
We need to trust.
We need to exchange certain metadata between the window size and all that stuff.
We need the handshake.
So we do a send snack an ack.
And so what happens in the back end?
This is where some stuff we just talked about right.
A server listens on the on an address port.
Client connects a kernel does a handshake.
The kernel does the handshake.
This is not you you you as a back end application, you only called.
Listen, you do not do any of this stuff.
The handshake, the connections, the the sink, the the accept queue.
All of this is handled by the kernel, including the connection management, the three way handshake.
But.
The kernel completes the connection, puts an exception.
It's all the onus on you as a back end process to call accept, to accept the connection.
Otherwise it's going to sit there in the accept queue and it fills up the accept queue.
And I do.
And I actually in my uncover and discovering, uh, back in bottleneck course it's a little bit intermediate
to advanced course.
I show you, I fill up the accept queue.
It's so cool.
Check out that course.
I fill up the accept queue and I try to connect.
And it's just the connection.
Uh, fails.
Times out.
It's so nice to force errors when you actually control errors because you completely understand what's
going on.
So I suggest you take that course to dive deep into troubleshooting back in application.
I don't think this this venue is the right venue for that because we're talking about the fundamentals
of operating systems here.
Right.
So let's go through this a little bit.
So the kernel creates a socket gets two queues send and accept client sends send.
Right.
So the client library understand how to speak the TCP protocol and sends a send.
And it's probably done by the kernel as well.
Right.
Because all the library does is like hey create a connection and the kernel does send and syn-ack and
the kernel adds the syn received by the client to the queue and replies back with a syn ack.
And then waits in this waiting.
That wait is dangerous.
People exploited that.
Wait.
You know where.
I added us in?
And I replied with the cynic and I'm waiting.
We're waiting for one more thing.
An act, a final act.
This guy, we're waiting for that final act to complete the connection.
Malicious client.
That was years ago.
Of course this problem was solved.
Malicious clients, uh, will send us n will will will receive a snack, but will never acknowledge.
What does that mean?
You have a sin occupied on the sin queue on the back end listener socket.
Send queue.
Now you do it again.
As an attacker, I do another sin.
I get a snack?
We just filled up another thin slot in the sink.
You, then just say, hey, never mind, I'm not going to reply with that.
So two you do it again and again and again.
Again.
You fill up the sink.
You just did a DDoS attack, a DDoS, not really a distributed.
A single user could could take down the whole.
Uh, client.
This will solve with sync cookies.
Right, which has been, uh, now this has the the problem has been solved long, long time ago with
timeouts and stuff like that.
Hey, if you don't send me a the scene within 520 milliseconds, you're done or something.
520 is too small, like 100 milliseconds.
And you can configure that timeout as well.
So congratulations.
The connection kernel removes the Syn from the syn queue, so frees up an entry in the scene queue and
the kernel adds a full connection to the accept queue and the back end accept connection removes it
from the accept queue.
If you accept the connection, it's removed from the accept queue.
If you do not accept the connection for any reason, let's say your application froze or you're just
too darn slow as a back end application, you're doing all sorts of things and you're not calling accept
fast enough.
Because you have a lot of connections.
You're doing all this work as a single process.
You can only do so much.
If you don't accept it, then it's going to rot.
And the more.
Connections that are left in the accept queue that will fail.
Completed connections from being moved to the queue because the the client, the kernel cannot can no
longer accept more sins because the accept queue is full and you don't really want to get into that
case.
You want to accept as many connections as possible, but you will also need to know if those connections
are malicious or not.
That's where Cloudflare and all these guys just, you know, spent tons of money and research on on
understanding the behavior of attackers versus legitimate users.
It's a very interesting world indeed.
And of course, we talked about this.
You get a beautiful file descriptor.
For every connection you accept.
Let's go through some animations.
So here's my client, here's my process ID on the back end that is running.
And of course, these two lives in the kernel, which nothing but a mapped area in the process to the
kernel step, uh, uh, to the kernel stage.
Right.
So accessing those queues, right.
Of course, require kernel mode, right, to be accessed.
You cannot access them directly from the process.
These are forbidden.
Right.
Uh, again I o you ring kind of brain breaks this rule.
But for normal operation, you cannot access them.
They are protected.
So the sin comes in here and it sits in the send queue, right.
So the sin will have a from IP address, a from port, a destination IP address and a destination port.
And that's the four tuples that uniquely identify this guy.
And you put it right here.
Beautiful.
Now we have a sin entry.
You immediately as a kernel reply back via snack where the from and two from IP and from port is the
whatever listening socket IP we listen to.
Right.
And actually whatever the client decided to connect to let's say I'm listening on all IPS, right.
So the sin the client cannot connect to all IPS.
It has to specify one.
And by knowing that one that becomes the source IP.
In this particular case, if and only if there is a matching corresponding socket, because I drew this
as a line.
But there's so much stuff going on going on here.
What is what is going on?
If I am doing a sin and I'm the my destination IP is 1.1.1.1.
All right.
That's Cloudflare's and the.
Port is 80.
Then the colonel first looks up the destination IP insert in table we're going to talk about.
And that table says, all right.
Do I have a matching, uh, Colonel entry that says I'm listening on this particular socket on this
IP?
Yes or no?
If yes, let's do it.
I accept you.
If no, we get an error that no listening socket or we get an error.
All right.
So you see there is a matching that needs to happen.
We need to look up.
Imagine yourself actually implementing this.
How would you do it?
There's like billions of ways to do it.
A little exaggerating, but the kernel does it a certain way.
This lookup should be.
Massively fast.
But possibly hopefully in the, in the, in the cache and the CPU.
All of these structures really need to be cached because you don't want to go look up that massive table
with all the listeners, you know, you want to quickly look it up.
And from this you would know based on that entry you would know which process.
It belongs to.
Absolutely beautiful.
So now we return the snack.
Let's say we have a behaving client that replies back with an ack!
Now you have a full fledged connection.
The colonel removes it and adds it to the accept queue.
Now we have a free connection here.
Now then.
The process calls, except.
Which will copy that connection, creates the content, creates a file descriptor, and copy it to the
to the user's file space and it will create an entry.
Yeah.
That's it.
All right.
Now we have an actual connection.
And it will create the two receive queue, the receive Q and the send queue for that particular connection.
Right now we have a file descriptor right here.
So problems with accepting connections.
Let's talk about some problems.
Backend doesn't accept fast enough clients who don't ask and we have a small backlog.
If you have a small backlog, you might you might have a problem with them, you know.
You call.
Except, by the way, if you call, except.
And this is empty.
You're blocked.
Right.
And that's why, except is also a candidate for asynchronous IO, which we're going to talk about in
another lecture.
Beautiful stuff you guys.
Let's talk about socket sharding a little bit.
Um.
There are.
Two different approaches to this, you know.
I'll talk about.
This is the second one, which is literally getting a different.
Distinct socket on the same port.
So we have two processes that are not talking to each other yet listening on the same socket.
So you have two sockets pointing to the same.
Um.
IP port pair.
Listener versus the other approach, where you have a listening socket and you fork the process to get
a copy of the file descriptor, which happened to point to the same logical, physical, sorry, socket.
So if those two guys.
We're sharing one pair of sin and accept queue here.
This is an approach where we're getting two distinct socket pointing to the same entry.
And you do this using the socket option reuse port because.
Normally, if you listen on the same port and IP, you get an error.
Remember like socket already listening.
That's a common error.
But with this you can actually get to another socket and you can do it any number of times.
Now this poses and we'll talk about this now in a minute.
Nginx does it, envoy does it, HAProxy does it.
And essentially what you do is you have the listener and the acceptors and the readers.
Right.
The acceptors, all of these are just different threads or different processes.
And this is what's called the socket sharding where this process will have a socket.
And this process will also have a socket and both represent the same IP port.
Now this poses a problem because if a client came in with a sin.
Right.
And.
What do we do in this particular case?
Which socket gets the syn.
And now I I'm imagining and I don't know the detail about this and I imagining either you can have two
sends or one send queue for both sockets but different accept queues for sure.
Right.
So in this particular case process one will have an accept queue process, two will have another accept
queue for the same port.
If I get a Syn on this port, complete the connection ready.
The kernel will do a load balancing.
It will throw the accept queue right.
It will throw the first connection on the first accept queue, the second one on the second, the third
one on the third, and so on.
Right.
And that's how we that's how they do it.
So it will distribute the connections on different accept queues.
And if it happens to have on this accept queues.
This process calls accept on its own socket which will point to their own accept queue.
And in this particular case we call accept on my socket which happens to use, but both are on the same
Nic on the same IP and port.
This is a common configuration that people do in order to scale acceptance, right?
And this is referred to as socket sharding or sharding the socket.
But the Linux kernel in this particular case does the load balancing.
So there is uh, when they first introduced this there was a lot of bugs with this.
Because, uh, as connections close and open, we lost the balance of, uh.
We have a connection.
You're done.
The connection is like, you have a nice file descriptor to go to.
The problem with this is only when you accept connections.
The load balancing becomes really interesting as as sockets get destroyed and recreated again.
Right.
So as I found this very interesting.
So I thought I added another just dedicated slide for that summary.
So the kernel manages the TCP IP part of networking.
At least every socket represent a port, an IP right.
You can with a specific socket options.
When you listen you can say, hey, I want to.
Listen on the same port and the same IP, despite someone else using them.
But it's not straightforward.
You have those two processes, have to agree on certain, you know, on certain cookie or certain key
to allow them to listen on the same port.
And this is basically determined by the first process.
If you don't know that key then you can't listen.
Because guess what?
What stops me from running a process in a server that happened to be listening on port 80 and I do a
socket reuse 80.
I can hijack packets as a malicious process.
That is a bad idea.
That was one of the bugs.
Early, early.
So to to fix that you need to know what was the key that was used in the listening and was socket option
reuse port actually allowed or not?
Can you listen on the same port or not?
So it's very, very interesting to learn about all of this stuff.
So each connected client gets a connection.
We talked about that.
And kernel manages the dole those beautiful data structures you know and there is an associated cost
to all this you guys you know, and it's not very clear from just the listening part because you don't
really shove a lot of data.
But for the connection acceptance I mean, not acceptance per se, but but just just receiving and actually
dealing with packets and parsing those packets.
There is so much stuff here that I'm not going to go through right.
That's a course by itself.
That's a book I know.
Because you're talking about the actual packets.
How do they.
And there's like when you receive a packet from the from the receive data from the NEC, the kernel
creates a data structure for it.
It's called skip uh, socket buffers.
Right.
And then adds data to it.
And then that there is metadata associated with it adds overhead.
So the kernel does all sorts of trick to merge and to merge packets together and have list headers do
so much stuff.
So you need if you are like a beefy machine, you need to assign a core or two just for the networking
stack, you know.
So all right, I'm going to leave one core or two just for the kernel to do this.
All this complex networking stuff, you know, especially if you have like a beefy CPU.
All right, guys, so let's move to the next lecture.